feat: pcd specs (#921)
ethereum-optimism/specs: specs/experimental/predictive-chain-deployments/contracts.md

- A pre-broadcast preflight re-checks the predicted addresses against current L1 state before deploying.

### aPCD-003: Trusted L1 RPC

The dry-run result is only trustworthy if the L1 RPC is not compromised and returns honest results.

#### Mitigations

- Use an independent, trusted RPC.
- Cross-check the dry-run against a second, independent L1 RPC. Divergent addresses flag a compromised endpoint before
  broadcast (see [FM3](./op-deployer.md#failure-modes)).

## Invariants

### iPCD-001: Predicting the L1 addresses is a no-op

Running the prediction MUST NOT write any state to L1.

#### Impact

**Severity: High**

A prediction that mutated state could change the very addresses it is meant to predict.

### iPCD-002: Permissioned deployments remain valid

The updated `_assertValidFullConfig` MUST still accept every `FullConfig` that was valid before this change.

#### Impact

**Severity: High**

If violated, valid configurations for permissioned deployments would be blocked.

### iPCD-003: Invalid configurations stay rejected

The updated `_assertValidFullConfig` MUST still reject every `FullConfig` that was invalid before this change, apart

> from enabling a permissionless game type at initial deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The updated `_assertValidFullConfig` MUST still reject every `FullConfig` that was invalid before this change, apart
from enabling other dispute game types at initial deployment.
```

#### Address prediction

`DeployOPChain` predicts the [`ChainContracts`](#chaincontracts-struct) for a given [`FullConfig`](#fullconfig).

**Behavior:**

- MUST execute `OPCM.deploy()` against the current L1 state.
- MUST use the same `from` address that will be used for the real broadcast.
- MUST NOT broadcast or otherwise write state to L1.
- MUST return the predicted [`ChainContracts`](#chaincontracts-struct) addresses to the caller.

#### Broadcasting a permissionless deployment

Today the script hard-codes a permissioned-only initial deployment:

- It `require`s the initial game type to be `PERMISSIONED_CANNON` (or `SUPER_PERMISSIONED_CANNON` in super-root mode),
  reverting with *"only PERMISSIONED_CANNON game type is supported for initial deployment"*.
- It builds the six `disputeGameConfigs` with the permissionless types disabled.
- It sets `startingRespectedGameType` to the permissioned type and `startingAnchorRoot` to a placeholder.

In order to support permissionless deployments the script is updated to:

- MUST permit a permissionless `startingRespectedGameType` (`CANNON_KONA` on the default path) at initial deployment.

> - MUST enable the permissionless `disputeGameConfigs` entries, each carrying its real `absolutePrestate`.

Reviewer: This should be _any arbitrary dispute_ game, not just CANNON_KONA.

Author: Addressed [here](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/specs/pull/921/changes/e69444538d2565deaed78fc2ee559c81d1706075)

    IDisputeGameFactory disputeGameFactory;
    IAnchorStateRegistry anchorStateRegistry;
    IDelayedWETH delayedWETH;
}
```

The `op-deployer` consumes a subset of these addresses when building the genesis and rollup artifacts:
- `l1CrossDomainMessenger`, `l1StandardBridge`, `l1ERC721Bridge` are inputs to `L2Genesis.s.sol` (the
  [L2 allocs](./overview.md#l2-allocs)).
- `optimismPortal` and `systemConfig` are written into `rollup.json`.

### FullConfig

The configuration struct passed into `OPCM.deploy()`. Defined in `OPContractsManagerV2.FullConfig`
(`src/L1/opcm/OPContractsManagerV2.sol`):

```solidity
struct FullConfig {
    string saltMixer;
    ISuperchainConfig superchainConfig;
    address proxyAdminOwner;
    address systemConfigOwner;
    address unsafeBlockSigner;
    address batcher;
    Proposal startingAnchorRoot;
    GameType startingRespectedGameType;
    uint32 basefeeScalar;
    uint32 blobBasefeeScalar;
    uint64 gasLimit;
    uint256 l2ChainId;
    IResourceMetering.ResourceConfig resourceConfig;
    IOPContractsManagerUtils.DisputeGameConfig[] disputeGameConfigs;
    bool useCustomGasToken;
}
```

> Once the PCD pipeline has built the `startingAnchorRoot` and the per-game `absolutePrestate`, it fills these fields

Reviewer 2: what do you mean "per-game"? does the pipeline compute multiple prestates for different game types?

Author: Yes, that's correct.

Reviewer 2: I think we can make it more clear that we need only 1 absolute prestate and not for every possible game type but only for the one we want to use

Reviewer: This is a good simplification/clarification. ie. it should be any dispute game type, but only enabling one is acceptable for now.

Author: Addressed [here](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/specs/pull/921/changes/366cc626e78739920717798d9321203be424920a)

with real values instead of placeholders: `startingAnchorRoot` is the genesis
[output root](./overview.md#output-root) with `l2SequenceNumber = 0`, and the per-game `absolutePrestate` is carried
inside `disputeGameConfigs`.

## Assumptions

### aPCD-001: OPCM address determinism

OPCM deploys proxies with CREATE2 using a salt derived from `msg.sender` and `saltMixer`, and no other inputs that
change across executions.
Given the same sender, config, and L1 state, the OPCM produces identical addresses.

#### Mitigations

> - The dry-run executes the full `OPCM.deploy()` logic without broadcasting, exercising the same code path as the

Reviewer 2: how do we ensure the addresses produced by the dry-run is the same as the ones that were actually deployed? since there will be a time gap between the dry-run and the actual deployment

Reviewer 2: ahh i guess the assumption 2 covers what i mention here, maybe it would be worth having these as 1 but I am fine keeping them as is too

Author: That's why we have included a preflight right before the actual broadcast, while it doesn't ensure 100% they will be the same because of the small time gap between pre-flight and the `OPCM.deploy` call, it should reduce the chances of it happening by a good amount, we still perform the post-deploy validation as the final check.

  real broadcast.

> ### aPCD-002: Dry-run and broadcast use the same sender

Reviewer 2: what about the salt? is that the same everytime?

Author: Addressed [here](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/specs/pull/921/changes/2b687015618279bbea4ddbc5f62c0d993484bad5)

The address prediction is only valid if the dry-run uses the same `from` address as the eventual broadcast,
since `msg.sender` is an input to the CREATE2 salt.

#### Mitigations

- op-deployer MUST use the same `from` address for the dry-run and the broadcast (see
  [FM2](./op-deployer.md#failure-modes)).
- A pre-broadcast preflight re-checks the predicted addresses against current L1 state before deploying.

### aPCD-003: Trusted L1 RPC

The dry-run result is only trustworthy if the L1 RPC is not compromised and returns honest results.

#### Mitigations

- Use an independent, trusted RPC.
- Cross-check the dry-run against a second, independent L1 RPC. Divergent addresses flag a compromised endpoint before
  broadcast (see [FM3](./op-deployer.md#failure-modes)).

## Invariants

### iPCD-001: Predicted addresses equal deployed addresses

> Given the same `from` address, `FullConfig`, and L1 state, the addresses returned by the dry-run MUST equal the

Reviewer 2: what do you mean with L1 state? the dry-run and the actual deployment will run at different times so L1 state will not be the same

Author: It meant the same OPCM with the same blueprints for the contracts. Changed to specifically read that instead.

addresses produced by the broadcast `OPCM.deploy()`.

#### Impact

**Severity: Critical**

If violated, the L2 genesis built from the predicted L1 addresses would not match the deployed L1 system,
producing an unusable chain and a dispute system seeded with an output root representing the wrong configuration.

### iPCD-002: Predicting the L1 addresses is a no-op

> Running the prediction MUST NOT write any state to L1.

Reviewer 2: how can this happen?

Author: Pretty much by a bug in the op-deployer, if we are using the same script the op-deployer needs to control if the transaction is broadcasted or not.

Reviewer 2: even if they broadcast though wouldnt the deployment fail ? if this is a possible scenario to happen then maybe we can also define a recovery path here or what the operator should do

Author: ~~Yeah, I think a recovery path should be added, but I would add those in the FMA not this doc.~~ On a second thought, an FMA item for this particular scenario is only concerned about predicted addresses being different from the eventual broadcast, which is already covered in the FMA document.
